README.md, before:

# To-Do List Application with Docker and Kubernetes (GKE)

This is a simple command-line To-Do List application written in python. The app allows users to manage tasks, including adding new tasks, viewing existing ones, and removing completed tasks. It creates a text file 'todo_list.txt' to store tasks persistently. Each task has a unique identifier (UUID), a task description and a deadline.

The project demonstrates the process of containerizing a Python application with Docker, pushing the image to DockerHub, and deploying it on a Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) cluster.

## Features

- Add new tasks with a unique ID, description, and deadline.
- Display all tasks currently stored in the to-do list.
- Mark tasks as completed by removing them from the list.
- Data is stored in a text file 'todo_list.txt' to persist between sessions.
- Docker containerization for easy deployment.

## How to Use:

1. Clone the repository to your local machine

```
git clone https://github.com/amoin512/DevOps-Projects.git
```

2. Build the Docker Image

In the project directory, run the following Docker command to build the image:

```
docker build -t todo_list_image:v1 .
```

This will:
- Use the `Dockerfile` to create a Docker image called `todo_list_image:v1`.
- Sets the base image to `python:3.9-slim` and the working directory as `/cli-app` and copies the `code.py` file into the container.
- Run the Python script `code.py` to start the application.

3. Tag the Docker Image to prepare for the Push

After building the Docker image, you can tag the image for Docker Hub:

```
docker tag todo_list_image:v1 moina512/python-todo-list-repo:latest
```

This command tags your local image `todo_list_image:v1` with the appropriate repository name and tag `moina512/python-todo-list-repo:latest`.

4. Log in to Docker Hub

```
docker login
```

You will be prompted to enter your Docker Hub username and password.

5. Push the Docker Image to Docker Hub

Push the tagged image to a Docker Hub repository:

```
docker push moina512/python-todo-list-repo:latest
```

This command uploads the image to Docker Hub under the `moina512/python-todo-list-repo` repository with the `latest` tag. You can now access this image from Docker Hub on any machine.

6. Run the Docker Container (on any machine)

Once the image is uploaded to Docker Hub, you can run the Docker container from the image with the following command:

```
docker run -it --rm moina512/python-todo-list-repo:latest
```

- The `-it` flag allows interactive mode so you can interact with the application.
- The `--rm` flag ensures the container is removed once you exit.

This step is to ensure that the application runs successfully as a container. 

7. Interact with the To-To List Application

Once the container is running, the application will prmopt you with the following options:

```
    == TODO LIST ==  
    [1] show task    
    [2] add task     
    [3] complete task
    [4] exit
```

- [1] **show task**: Displays all tasks with their IDs, descriptions, and deadlines. 
- [2] **add task**: Add a new task by providing a description and deadline. The task will be assigned a unique ID.
- [3] **complete task**: Remove a task by entering its ID. This will mark as completed and delete it from the list.
- [4] **exit**: Exit the application.

8. Stop the Docker Container

To stop the container and exit the application, simply type `4`. This will exit the application and remove the container since `--rm` was used.

## Error Handling:

- If any error occurs while reading or writing to the file, the program will display an error message.
- Invalid menu choices with prompt user to try again.

# Deploying the Application on GKE

## Steps to Deploy on GKE

1. Authenticate GCP CLI

Start by authenticating your GCP account: 

```
gcloud auth login
```

2. Set the GCP Project

Set the project you want to work with:

```
gcloud config set project PROJECT_ID
```

3. Create a GKE Cluster

You can create a GKE cluster using the following command:

```
gcloud container clusters create CLUSTER_NAME \
  --zone ZONE \
  --num-nodes 1
```

4. Configure kubectl to USE GKE Cluster

Configure `kubectl` to interact with the GKE cluster:

```
gcloud container clusters get-credentials CLUSTER_NAME --zone ZONE --project PROJECT_ID
```

5. Create Kubernetes Deployment and Service

Define two Kubernetes resources: a **Deployment** to manage the application pods, and a **Service** to expose the app externally. Save these resources in YAML files (`deployment.yaml` and `service.yaml`).

- `deployment.yaml`

```
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: todo-app
  labels:
    app: todo-list
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: todo-list
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: todo-list
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: todo-c
        image: moina512/python-todo-list-repo:latest
        command: ["python", "ToDoList_Code.py"]
        stdin: true #enable interactive input
        tty: true #allocate TTY for interactive sessions
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
```

The **Deployment** will pull the Docker image from DockerHub and run it in the Kubernetes cluster.

- `service.yaml`

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: todo-app-service
spec:
  type: LoadBalancer
  selector:
    app: todo-list
  ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 80 #exposed port for external access
      targetPort: 80 #port inside the container
```

The **Service** will expose the app via a LoadBalancer, allowing external access to the application on port 80.

6. Deploy to GKE

Apply the Kubernetes configuration to deploy the app:

```
kubectl create -f deployment.yaml
kubectl create -f service.yaml
```

7. Verify Deployment

Check if the pod(s) is running successfully:

```
kubectl get pods
```

You should see a pod running with the name `todo-app-<random-string>`.

7. Get the External IP

To access the application from a web browser , find the external IP of the LoadBalancer service:

```
kubectl get svc todo-app-service
```

Look for the `EXTERNAL-IP` filed. Once the IP address is available, you should be able to access the To-Do List application in your browser by navigating to:

```
http://<EXTERNAL-IP>
```

Commit message:

edited the readme file again

README.md, after:

# To-Do List Application with Docker and Kubernetes (GKE)

This is a simple command-line To-Do List application written in python. The app allows users to manage tasks, including adding new tasks, viewing existing ones, and removing completed tasks. It creates a text file 'todo_list.txt' to store tasks persistently. Each task has a unique identifier (UUID), a task description and a deadline.

The project demonstrates the process of containerizing a Python application with Docker, pushing the image to DockerHub, and deploying it on a Google Kubernetes Engine (GKE) cluster.

## Features

- Add new tasks with a unique ID, description, and deadline.
- Display all tasks currently stored in the to-do list.
- Mark tasks as completed by removing them from the list.
- Data is stored in a text file 'todo_list.txt' to persist between sessions.
- Docker containerization for easy deployment.

## Steps Involved

1. **Define the Dockerfile**

```
FROM python:3.9-slim
WORKDIR /cli-app
COPY code.py /cli-app
CMD [ "python", "code.py" ]
```
The base image is `python:3.9-slim`, and the working directory of the container is `/cli-app`. The only file that is being copied to the container is `code.py`. 

2. **Build the Docker Image**

In the directory of the `Dockerfile`, run the following Docker command to build the image:

```
docker build -t todo_list_image:v1 .
```

This will:
- Use the `Dockerfile` to create a Docker image called `todo_list_image:v1`.
- Sets the base image to `python:3.9-slim` and the working directory as `/cli-app` and copies the `code.py` file into the container.
- Run the Python script `code.py` to start the application.

3. **Tag the Docker Image to prepare for the Push**

After building the Docker image, tag the image for Docker Hub:

```
docker tag todo_list_image:v1 moina512/python-todo-list-repo:latest
```

This command tags the local image `todo_list_image:v1` with the appropriate repository name and tag `moina512/python-todo-list-repo:latest`.

4. **Log in to Docker Hub**

```
docker login
```

You will be prompted to enter your Docker Hub username and password.

5. **Push the Docker Image to Docker Hub**

Push the tagged image to a Docker Hub repository:

```
docker push moina512/python-todo-list-repo:latest
```

This command uploads the image to Docker Hub under the `moina512/python-todo-list-repo` repository with the `latest` tag. The image is now accessible from any machine.

6. **Run the Docker Container (on any machine)**

Once the image is uploaded to Docker Hub, run the Docker container from the image with the following command:

```
docker run -it --rm moina512/python-todo-list-repo:latest
```

- The `-it` flag allows interactive mode so you can interact with the application.
- The `--rm` flag ensures the container is removed once you exit.

This step is to ensure that the application runs successfully as a container. 

7. **Interact with the To-To List Application**

Once the container is running, the application will prmopt you with the following options:

```
    == TODO LIST ==  
    [1] show task    
    [2] add task     
    [3] complete task
    [4] exit
```

- [1] **show task**: Displays all tasks with their IDs, descriptions, and deadlines. 
- [2] **add task**: Add a new task by providing a description and deadline. The task will be assigned a unique ID.
- [3] **complete task**: Remove a task by entering its ID. This will mark as completed and delete it from the list.
- [4] **exit**: Exit the application.

8. **Stop the Docker Container**

To stop the container and exit the application, simply type `4`. This will exit the application and remove the container since `--rm` was used.

## Error Handling:

- If any error occurs while reading or writing to the file, the program will display an error message.
- Invalid menu choices with prompt user to try again.

# Deploying the Application on GKE

## Steps to Deploy on GKE

1. **Authenticate GCP CLI**

Start by authenticating your GCP account: 

```
gcloud auth login
```

2. **Set the GCP Project**

Set the project you want to work with:

```
gcloud config set project PROJECT_ID
```

3. **Create a GKE Cluster**

You can create a GKE cluster using the following command:

```
gcloud container clusters create CLUSTER_NAME \
  --zone ZONE \
  --num-nodes 1
```

4. **Configure kubectl to USE GKE Cluster**

Configure `kubectl` to interact with the GKE cluster:

```
gcloud container clusters get-credentials CLUSTER_NAME --zone ZONE --project PROJECT_ID
```

5. **Create Kubernetes Deployment and Service**

Define two Kubernetes resources: a **Deployment** to manage the application pods, and a **Service** to expose the app externally. Save these resources in YAML files (`deployment.yaml` and `service.yaml`).

- `deployment.yaml`

```
apiVersion: apps/v1
kind: Deployment
metadata:
  name: todo-app
  labels:
    app: todo-list
spec:
  replicas: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app: todo-list
  template:
    metadata:
      labels:
        app: todo-list
    spec:
      containers:
      - name: todo-c
        image: moina512/python-todo-list-repo:latest
        command: ["python", "code.py"]
        stdin: true #enable interactive input
        tty: true #allocate TTY for interactive sessions
        ports:
        - containerPort: 80
```

The **Deployment** will pull the Docker image from DockerHub and run it in the Kubernetes cluster.

- `service.yaml`

```
apiVersion: v1
kind: Service
metadata:
  name: todo-app-service
spec:
  type: LoadBalancer
  selector:
    app: todo-list
  ports:
    - protocol: TCP
      port: 80 #exposed port for external access
      targetPort: 80 #port inside the container
```

The **Service** will expose the app via a LoadBalancer, allowing external access to the application on port 80.

6. **Deploy to GKE**

Apply the Kubernetes configuration to deploy the app:

```
kubectl create -f deployment.yaml
kubectl create -f service.yaml
```

7. **Verify Deployment**

Check if the pod(s) is running successfully:

```
kubectl get pods
```

You should see a pod running with the name `todo-app-<random-string>`.

7. **Get the External IP**

To access the application from a web browser , find the external IP of the LoadBalancer service:

```
kubectl get svc todo-app-service
```

Look for the `EXTERNAL-IP` filed. Once the IP address is available, you should be able to access the To-Do List application in your browser by navigating to:

```
http://<EXTERNAL-IP>
```
